# How to Identify AI-assisted Writing Patterns

When exploring a student's writing process report, teachers can use the pointers below to identify potential AI-assisted writing.

---

### 1. Inspect typing time

The <a href="https://help.processfeedback.org/?insight=typing-time" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Typing Time section</a> shows the total typing time in the document. In most cases high typing time can be thought of as a lot of effort. Typing time is the time spent on the document by ignoring all the breaks taken during the typing. Documents with very less typing time, such as one or two minutes, are often worth inspecting. For example, if a student finished a 500 word essay in 3 minutes, it is unlikely that the student typed it on their own.

### 2. Inspect large "external" paste events

The <a href="https://help.processfeedback.org/?insight=copy-paste-events" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Paste Events section</a> shows all the paste events (or paste-like events) during the writing process. A student may paste text generated by AI into their editor during their writing process. Here is how to identify such paste events:

1. In the Paste Events section of the report, click on the "Characters" column to sort, so that large paste events appear on top.
2. Look for rows that have "Likely from Outside" in the "Source" column.
3. Click on "Pasted Text" in the row and inspect if the text appears to be from outside source. If needed, this text pasted by the student can be copied and pasted into other AI detectors for further inspection.
4. Click on the "Time of Paste" to open Compare Changes and inspect where in the editor this text was pasted.

### 3. Inspect text deletions 

The <a href="https://help.processfeedback.org/?insight=text-added-removed" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Text Added and Removed section</a> shows the rythm of text additions and deletions during the writing process. Unless a student is free writing 100%, a writing process isn't smooth and also involves frequent deletions. If a student's chart appears too smooth with all green bubbles the same size and no red bubbles, it can be worth inspecting. Also, if there are some large green bubbles then also it can b wowrth inspection. Clicking of the read or green bubbles can show what are deleted or adden when.

### 4. Inspect breaks taken 

The <a href="https://help.processfeedback.org/?insight=active-typing-sessions-chart-view" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Focused Typing and Breaks section</a> shows how 

### 5. Inspect free typing and revision patterns 

in the Edited Sentences section

Learn more about the Edited Sentences section <a href="https://help.processfeedback.org/?insight=edited-sentences" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">here</a>.

### 6. Increase the resolution when viewing the report

By default Process Feedback only picks up a maximum of 360 time points from the editing history. This is relatively enough detail for reports with typing time less than 15 or 20 minutes. However, if you want a more granular view, open the Playback or other report sections and choose a more detailed option in the “Level of details” dropdown.

## Uncommon scenarios

### Use of agentic AI

### Typing by looking from a different screen

### Voice typing 